Aladdin
Aladdin-disneyscreencaps com-1535
Jafar and Iago in Aladdin.

In Aladdin, Jafar is introduced as the sinister Royal Vizier to Agrabah's Sultan who desires power over the kingdom. By the start of the film, Jafar has spent years searching for the Cave of Wonders, home of the Genie's lamp. He manages to obtain one half of a Golden Scarab Beetle that—when joined—will lead its holder to the Cave of Wonders' entrance. One night, Jafar rendezvous with an underworld contact named Gazeem, whom he hired to find the second Golden Scarab Beetle half. After encountering some delays, Gazeem finally delivers the scarab, allowing Jafar to unite the two halves together and summon the Cave of Wonders from the sand. Jafar orders Gazeem to enter the cave to retrieve the lamp while promising the cave's other treasures as compensation. Once Gazeem steps into it, however, the guardian of the cave recognizes Gazeem as unworthy and closes itself off, resulting in Gazeem's death. The cave passes only a cryptic warning to Jafar relating to a "Diamond in the Rough" capable of entering the cave. Despite Iago's frustration, Jafar remains undeterred, and simply declares that he must find this "Diamond in the Rough" for their plans.

Aladdin-disneyscreencaps
Jafar finds his Diamond in the Rough.

Jafar returns to Agrabah, where he learns from the Sultan that Jasmine doesn't wish to marry a prince. Jafar offers to help in exchange for the Sultan's familial sapphire ring. When the Sultan shows reluctance, Jafar uses his hypnotic snake staff to change the former's mind. After departing, Iago voices his frustration with the Sultan, but Jafar assures his accomplice that he will soon be in power. In his secret laboratory, Jafar uses the Sultan's ring to power the Sands of Time, which he uses to uncover the Diamond in the Rough. Eventually, the individual necessary to access the Cave of Wonders is identified as Aladdin. Jafar orders for Aladdin's arrest as a subtle means of recruiting him, although he did not expect Jasmine to have accompanied the street rat (she had escaped from the palace earlier to avoid having to find another prince at her doorstep). When Jasmine tries to defend Aladdin from the guards, Razoul informs the princess that his orders actually came from Jafar and must be taken up with him, to which she said that she will. Jasmine confronts Jafar that night, demanding to know why Aladdin was arrested under his authority. He tells her the Sultan has put him charge of keeping the peace in the city. He then states that Aladdin was a criminal. She demands to know what in's Aladdin's crime is but Jafar lies to her, for his committing the crime of "kidnapping the princess". Jasmine states that she ran away, she was never kidnapped, Jafar however claims that he cannot release Aladdin as he had already been executed which Jasmine is horrified by (despite telling Jafar that she actually ran away from home).

Bcfddsddgh
Jafar, disguised, as a beggar, meets Aladdin.

With Jasmine out of the way of his plans, Jafar disguises himself as an old prisoner and sneaks into the dungeon, where he offers to help Aladdin escape in exchange for aiding him in retrieving the lamp from the Cave of Wonders; Jafar assures that the cave is filled with enough treasure to "impress a princess". Aladdin accepts the deal, and together, the two travel to the cave's entrance. Aladdin is declared worthy by its guardian, and Jafar promises to hand Aladdin his reward once the lamp has been retrieved. While inside, Aladdin's pet monkey triggers the cave's downfall. Aladdin rushes to the exit, where he finds himself dangling for life. Jafar madly requests the lamp, to which Aladdin obliges. With the lamp in his possession, Jafar attempts to kill Aladdin, but he is foiled by Abu. Aladdin and Abu are nevertheless dropped into the dissolving cave and apparently die alongside it. As Jafar boasts about his victory, he finds that the lamp is missing. Unbeknownst to him, the lamp was actually stolen by Abu, who hands it over to Aladdin. By teaming up with the Genie, the two escape the cave and return to Agrabah safely.

Aladdin-disneyscreencaps
Jafar orders the Sultan to make Jasmine his bride.

Afterward, Jafar is reprimanded by the Sultan for executing a prisoner without even consultating him first (Jasmine had informed the Sultan earlier of Jafar's supposed execution of Aladdin), with Jafar swearing that it won't happen again. Despite the Sultan’s forgiveness, the furious Jasmine vows to "get rid of" Jafar once she’s Queen. Jafar takes Jasmine's threats to heart, fuming over the loss of the lamp while also fearing the possible loss of his position in the palace, or worse, his head. As he contemplates on the matter, Iago concocts a new plot to have Jafar marry Jasmine, thus legally becoming entitled to the throne as sultan. Once the kingdom is under their command, they can kill both Jasmine and the Sultan and maintain absolute power for themselves. Jafar is enticed by the idea and carries it through by using a fake provision in the law that would allow a royal vizier to marry a princess, as a means to "solve" the Sultan's problems of finding a suitor for Jasmine. The Sultan, for a number of reasons, is not keen on the idea, forcing Jafar to resort to hypnosis.

Jafar is revealed 
Prince Ali reveals Jafar's treachery to the Sultan.

Before the power of the snake staff can take full effect, the Sultan is freed from his trance by the sounds of fanfare entering the city, belonging to the flashy parade of a visiting suitor named Prince Ali. Jafar immediately sees Prince Ali as a rival for Jasmine's hand in marriage, and plots to have him killed. That night, he orders Razoul and the guards to kidnap Ali and ensure he's never found. When he returns to the palace, Jafar successfully hypnotizes the Sultan, forcing him to abide by the marriage between the former and Jasmine. As Jasmine refuses, Ali reveals himself to be alive and accuses Jafar of attempted murder. Jafar tries to cover his crimes by hypnotizing the Sultan, but Ali realizes what he’s doing and destroys Jafar's staff—freeing the Sultan. Ali hands the staff to the Sultan and reveals what Jafar was doing. Jafar tries to cover himself but this time the furious Sultan doesn’t believe him and calls for Jafar's arrest. As the guards take him away, Jafar manages to escape with a smoke bomb, although not before glancing at the lamp inside Ali's turban. Back in his lair, Jafar deduces that Prince Ali is actually Aladdin in disguise. He orders Iago to steal the lamp, which the latter accomplishes the following day.

Jafarrmdd
Jafar becomes the most powerful sorcerer in the world.

Later on, the Sultan gathers the people of Agrabah to announce the engagement of Ali and Jasmine, while Jafar observes from his hideout. Now more vengeful than ever, Jafar rubs the lamp and unleashes the Genie. He declares himself the new master of the lamp and proclaims that his first wish is to rule on high, as sultan. The Genie makes it so by stripping the Sultan of his royal garb and placing the palace atop a high mountain. Jafar's first order as ruler is to have Jasmine and her father bow to him, but they refuse. Scorned, Jafar looks to strike fear by wishing to become the most powerful sorcerer in the world. The Genie grants Jafar magical powers and a new snake staff, which he uses to humiliate Jasmine and her father. When Ali tries to intervene, he is exposed as a fraud by Jafar's magic, and is reverted back into a street rat. Jafar then banishes Aladdin to the ends of the Earth, where he will freeze to death. With Aladdin gone, Jafar falls into a fit of hysteria as he assumes control of the world.

Aladdin-disneyscreencaps com-9415
Jafar as a giant cobra.

Under Jafar's rule, Agrabah is a dystopian city clouded by a blood-red sky. The Sultan has been turned into a jester, forced to endure torture at the hands of Iago. Jasmine, meanwhile, is turned into Jafar's slave. While lounging about in the palace, Jafar offers to make Jasmine his queen, which she hotly refuses. Unfazed, Jafar wishes to have Jasmine fall desperately in love with him, but the Genie tries to explain that his magic can't make people fall in love. Despite this, Jasmine appears to fall madly in lust with Jafar as she seductively flirts with him. Jafar is too caught up in his own pleasure to realize that this is a ruse, as Aladdin is mere feet away from the lamp. Iago tries to warn Jafar, but Abu intervenes. As the parrot and monkey scuffle, Jafar's attention is nearly caught, but Jasmine hastily pulls him in for a kiss to buy Aladdin more time. However, Jafar sees Aladdin's reflection in Jasmine's tiara and instantly attacks. Through the power of the snake staff, Jasmine is imprisoned in an hourglass, Abu is turned into a toy, and Carpet is unraveled. When called a "cowardly snake" afraid to fight for himself by Aladdin, Jafar responds by transforming himself into a giant cobra and striking at Aladdin. Eventually, Jafar traps Aladdin within his coils.

Aladdin-disneyscreencaps
Jafar, now a genie, sucked into a lamp of his own.

Jafar taunts Aladdin’s helplessness without the Genie’s magic. Aladdin retorts by declaring Jafar is still just "second-best" to the Genie, as the genie gave Jafar his power in the first place and can also take it away. Realizing what Aladdin says is true, Jafar uses his final wish to become an all-powerful genie, himself. With phenomenal, cosmic power at his command, Jafar seizes control of the cosmos and declares himself ruler of the universe. But this does not last long, as Aladdin points out that the power of a genie comes with a price, which manifests in Jafar receiving his own golden shackles and a black lamp. Jafar, realizing too late that he has been tricked, makes a desperate attempt to escape being sucked into his lamp by grabbing onto Iago's tail feathers, but this merely drags Iago into the lamp alongside him. Foiled and trapped by his own greed, Jafar's magic over Agrabah and its inhabitants are undone. Jafar's Lamp, meanwhile, is sent to the Cave of Wonders by Genie, where the bickering Jafar and Iago would be doomed to remain, as prisoners, for no less than 10,000 years.
